== authcan_easyroller

This is a basic Rails engine utilizing Authlogic[http://github.com/binarylogic/authlogic],
CanCan[http://github.com/ryanb/cancan] and Easy&nbsp;Roles[http://github.com/platform45/easy_roles]
for simple Rails 3.x applications that need authentication and authorization.



== Basis for Creation

As a Rails developer, I find myself needing an elegant and easy-to-use solution for authentication
and authorization in the small web-apps that I create. They generally aren't linked together since
they are separate clients with completely different ideas and business models, but they both need
the same underlying code to manage their users.

I have used Authlogic for quite a while now and have found it to be very useful and a complete
solution for authentication. Adding a dash of functionality here and there is fairly easy and the
ability to extend it really drew me in (in fact, I helped develop some of the code behind
authlogic_ldap[http://github.com/topherfangio/authlogic_ldap] which I never got to finish but
still intend to do).

After watching the screencast[http://railscasts.com/episodes/192-authorization-with-cancan] by
Ryan Bates, I decided that CanCan was a great addition to my applications since it was easy to
use and cleanly separated the authorization from the model and view logic. The only other piece
was an easy way to manage roles soley in code, yet while storing the assignments in the database;
and I found this in Easy Roles.

Putting the three together, I now have a complete (albeit simple) authentication and authorization
solution that I can easily plugin into existing or new applications (and update in one spot).



== Future Enhancements

Before we get into the nitty-gritty of how to use it, I wanted to go ahead and mention the
planned enhancements so you can get a feel of where this project will go.

* Authlogic supports many different types of authentication without you needing to change
  hardly anything, so I plan on modifying the code to allow for all of the possible authentication
  schemes. Thus, I definitely plan on integrating OpenID, LDAP, Facebook Connect and OAuth. I may
  or may not implement PAM, but we'll see.
* I plan on adding an easy password reset mechanism for users provided that you use an email column.
* I also plan to add the configuration option to turn on e-mail verification before users are granted
  access to the system.



== Installation/Setup

<b>Developers Note:</b> <em>I have created an example&nbsp;project[http://github.com/topherfangio/authcan_easyroller-example]
if you are just looking to play with it, or if you are having trouble getting your setup to work properly. It should
have everything necessary to get up and running quickly.</em>

Assuming you already have Rails 3 installed, installation is very simple; just add the gem to your Gemfile
and run bundle install!

  # Add this to your gemfile
  gem "authcan_easyroller", ">= 0.1.3"

Run

  bundle install

Next, create a migration for the users:

  rails generate migration CreateUsers

Then, copy the following contents into that file making any changes you see fit:

  class CreateUsers < ActiveRecord::Migration
    def self.up
      create_table :users do |t|
        # Necessary Columns - These are required for AuthcanEasyroller to function properly
        t.string    :email,               :null => false
        t.string    :crypted_password,    :null => false
        t.string    :password_salt,       :null => false
        t.string    :persistence_token,   :null => false
        t.string    :single_access_token, :null => false
        t.string    :perishable_token,    :null => false
        t.integer   :roles_mask,          :null => false, :default => 0
				
        # Magic Columns - You may leave any of the following out if you wish
        t.integer   :login_count,         :null => false, :default => 0
        t.integer   :failed_login_count,  :null => false, :default => 0
        t.datetime  :last_request_at
        t.datetime  :current_login_at
        t.datetime  :last_login_at
        t.string    :current_login_ip
        t.string    :last_login_ip
	 
        # Timestamp Columns - You should have these on every database table you create
        t.timestamps
      end
    end

    def self.down
      drop_table :users
    end
  end

Once saved, migrate your database by running

  rake db:migrate

Next, copy the following files to their proper locations (feel free to edit them, these are just some basics to
help get you started). The <tt>rails.js</tt> file at the bottom of the list is the official Rails jQuery file available
at http://github.com/rails/jquery-ujs so make sure to remove the existing <tt>rails.js</tt> file from <tt>public/javascripts</tt>.

<b>Developer's Note:</b> <em>To save time, you can use <tt>wget</tt> or <tt>curl</tt> (which is installed by default on OS X) to download these files
from the command line directly into the proper locations. Basic usage is as follows:</em>

  cd my_app_directory/some/path/
  wget http://github.com/topherfangio/autcan_easyroller-example/raw/master/some/path/filename.rb

or

  curl http://github.com/topherfangio/autcan_easyroller-example/raw/master/some/path/filename.rb > some/path/new_filename.rb

* ability.rb[http://github.com/topherfangio/authcan_easyroller-example/raw/master/app/models/ability.rb] -> <<APPLICATION>>/app/models/ability.rb
* application.html.erb[http://github.com/topherfangio/authcan_easyroller-example/raw/master/app/views/layouts/application.html.erb] -> <<APPLICATION>>/app/view/layouts/application.html.erb
* main.css[http://github.com/topherfangio/authcan_easyroller-example/raw/master/public/stylesheets/main.css] -> <<APPLICATION>/public/stylesheets/main.css
* rails.js[http://github.com/rails/jquery-ujs/raw/master/src/rails.js] -> <<APPLICATION>/public/javascripts/rails.js

Finally, remove <tt>public/index.html</tt> and add the following to your <tt>config/routs.rb</tt> file so that your server will load properly.

  root :to => 'users#index'

== Starting Your Engine

Once you have everything setup correctly, simply run the following to start your application, then visit http://localhost:3000

	rails server

The application realizes that it has no users, and forces you to create one before you can continue
to any page. The first user is always created as an administrator and thus has privileges to create
new users, give themselves the "developer" role (or any/all roles) and do other adminy things. All
users created after this will be given the default role of "user".

Currently, the available roles are

1. Developer
2. Admin
3. Moderator
4. User

I'm working on a way to extend this functionality as a configuration option, or perhaps give it an
API so that you can create your own roles or modify the existing ones without having to delve into
the gem's code. Check back often to see where that stands if it is something you need.



== Usage

You can find out more by checking each specific project's documentation, but here is the gist:

A user's abilities are defined in <tt>app/models/ability.rb</tt>. I generally prefer to specify what
each role is allowed to do and then give a user all of the roles that they need instead of
saying that an admin can do everything that a moderator can do. This tends to keep the ability
model cleaner and your views don't change either. In addition, this allows you to assign roles
to a user for special circumstances. For instance, if you are writing a help desk app, you may
decide that one particular customer is really superb and should also have status update abilities
even though he has the customer role.

You define your abilities in each role's section. For instance, the moderator's role currently looks
like so:

  # Moderator role abilities
  if current_user.is_moderator?
  end

If you wanted to let moderators manage users, you would simply call <tt>can</tt>

  # Moderator role abilities
  if current_user.is_moderator?
    can :manage, User
  end

You can also define your own abilities if they don't tie to a particular object, but you must pass a
<tt>nil</tt> object as the second argument to <tt>can?</tt> and you must specify all object types when
defining the ability. I'll get in touch with the developer to see if this can be a tad bit more streamlined.

  # ability.rb

  class Ability

    # Include the ability class so you can have some defaults
    include AuthcanEasyroller::Ability

    def initialize(current_user)

      # If you override initialize, make sure to call this
      # method so that you have the defaults setup
      ae_ability_defaults(current_user)

      # Moderator role abilities
      if current_user.is_moderator?
        can :visit_woot_all_day, :all
      end

    end
  end


  # application.html.erb 

  <% if can? :visit_woot_all_day, nil %>
    <%= link_to "Woot", "http://www.woot.com" %>
  <% end %>

Once you have the roles and abilities setup, your views can check who has access by simply calling <tt>can?</tt>

  if can? :create, Comment
    ...
  end

You can also use <tt>cannot?</tt>

  link_to "Export", export_users_url unless cannot? :create, Export

Using <tt>can?</tt> and <tt>cannot?</tt> is the preferred method of checking authorization privileges, however,
if you find a rare case that you need to limit access based on the role(s) that a user has, you can
always do the following:

  if current_user.is_moderator? || current_user.is_admin?
    ...
  end

However, the beauty of authcan_easyroller (more specifically the CanCan integration) is that you
don't have to. That is the exact purpose of the <tt>Ability</tt> class! Use it to your advantage and
make your life easier.



== Special Thanks

I would like to thank the creators of Authlogic, CanCan and Easy Roles for the effort that they put
into these plugins. Adding them together was relatively straightforward and easy and I hope that they
realize how much time this saves other developers!

Copyright (c) 2009-2010 Topher Fangio
